FOCUS ON DESIDOC

MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
This column presents the activities, services and
achievements of DESIDOC. Beginning from January
1990, this is the eighth article in the series. Each issue
highlights the achievements in a particular area. The last
seven issues have covered an overview of DESIDOC, its
publication, information processing and dissemination,
translation, library, reprographic, and polygraphic

The R&D and other S&T departments
in general require information specialists
who are abreast of current information
techn'blogies for providing adequate
information support. The need for such
information support is all the more
important for DRDO where
the
technological expertise expected is very
high. DESIDOC conducts training and
user-education programmes on various
9
important aspects of information science and
technology. These programmes are designed
to provide adequate knowledge and skill to
the officers and staff working in the
librariesltechnical information centres of
DRDO labslestts.
The
training
programmes
are
practical-oriented and more stress is given
on assignments. These events are of short
duration (one to two weeks) and are restricted to the scientific and technical personnel
of DRDO and other organizations/agencies
of the Ministry of Defence, including
Defence public sector undertakings. The
type of personnel invited for participation in
such training programmes are: (a) those who
do
not
possess
any
professional
qualifications/training in the field of
information science; (b) those who have the
professional qualifications but need

expospre to current developments; (c) those
engaged in new areas such as
computerization, video-technology, phototypesetter-based printing, and others where
jobs demanded such training.
Training Programmes Identified

The training programmes conducted by
DESIDOC can be broadly categorized under
the following heads:
Technical Communicafion

The Centre's courses on technical
communication aim to equip the scientists
with the art of effective presentation of

technical ideas and dissemination of
scientific information in a clear and concise
manner.
Application of Computer to Library and
Information Work

through slides (1); input preparation for
computerized information system (3);
application of computer to library and
information
work
(4);
use
of
microprocessors/microcomputers
for
information processing (2); mini-micro
CDS/ISIS software package (2); and
information technology (1). The courses
were held at Delhi, Hyderabad, Bangalore,
Cochin, and Pune.
Workshop on Information Technology

Dr SS Murthy speaking at the inaugural session of the
!raining programme.

The courses on application of computer
to library and inforqation work expose
participants to the i m p p i n t applications of
computers in inform ti?n and library work.
The courses cover2some fundakentals on
software and hardware, user profiles,
preparation of input sheets, data entry,
database searching;DRDO-IRS, CDSASIS,
etc.

a

Reprbgraphy and ~cikntificPhotography
The courses on reprography and scientific
photography give emphasis on the current
techniques
and
methodologies
of
reprography and photography. The course
is practical-oriented, and a lot of emphasis
is laid on 'learning by practice.'
Training Programmes Organized
DESIDOC has organized more than 30
courses till date; some of the courses have
been repeated as and when required. The
topics covered under these programmes
include: indexing (5); Universal Decimal
Classification (3); effective technica1,writing
(3);
information
processing
and
management (1); reprography and scientific
photography (4); visual presentation

The last in the series of the programmes
listed above is the one-month workshop on
informatiov technology conducted by
DESIDOC in July 1990. The workshop was
aimed at creating awareness and imparting
training in the adoption of various aspects
of information technology to improve the
overall quality of information services in DRDO. Seventeen participants, including
three from the Indian Air Force attended
the, workshop. The workshop was divided
into four modules:

* lnfroduction to use of Computer:
computer hardware, software, operating
system, DOS and Wordstar;
* Input Preparation: indexing languages
and techniques, use of thesaurus,
AACR-11, and CCF;
* Information Processing: application of
computers to library and information
activities, software packages including
dBASE 3, CDS/ISIS ver 2.3, DELMS (a
software developed by DESIDOC),
database creation, and online searching
of database; and
* Information Transfer: information
networks, electronic mail, expert
systems, CD-ROM technology, desktop
publishing, and FAX.
Participation in Training Programmes
Conducted by Outside Agencies
DESIDOC staff is also deputed for
long-term courses in information science
such as one-year Associateship Course in
Information Science of the Indian National

Scientific
Documentation
Centre
(INSDOC), New Delhi and of9 the
Documentation Research and Training
Centre (DWTC), Bangalore, and also for
short-term courses at the institutions where
facilities are easily available and the
requirement is of urgent nature.
Professional Lectures
There exists a regular programme of
m-house lectures by DESIDOC staff on
current topics related to scientific
information. This activity not only exposes
the DESIDOC staff to the state-of-the-art
technologies, but also helps in inculcating
the habit of reading and communicating such
information: Special lectures by eminent
personalities are also organized in the field
of library and information science on topics
of interest to DESIDOC for the benefit of
its staff.

bemars and Conferences

DES~OC
has been actively participating
in the national seminars/conferences
organized by professional bodies, such as
Indian Association of Scientific Libraries
and Information Centres (IASLIC), Indian
Library Association (ILA), Association of
Govt Librarians and Information Specialists
(AGLIS),
INSDOC,
Society
for
Information Science (SIS), and DRTC.
Besides providing exposure on current status
in the areas of interest to DESIDOC through
participation in such events, the Centre has
also been involving its staff in the
organization of such events at both national
and international levels. DESIDOC has so
far organized the following conferences/
seminars:
@
Seminar o n Sci~ntvicInformation, New
Delht (4-6 Dec 1969). The topics discussed
in the Seminar include: SDI, information
theory, technical writing and editing,
popular science writing, translation of
scientific literature, an$ reprographic
services.
@ _ National
Conference o n Scientific
Information for Defence, New Delhi (25-26

Feb 6984). About 68 papers were presemed
in six technical sessions, namely, (i) information requirements of Defence services;
(ii) information requirements of Defence
scientists; (iii) information generation,
acquisition, processing and dissemination;
(iv) information technologies; (v) information
communication
barriers;
and
(vi) information network for Defence. The
Conference recommended that there was
need for creating a national science
information system for Defence.
Seminar on Defence Science Information
-Network, Delhi (17-18 Feb 1987). Thirty-six
papers were presented in four technical
sessions, namely, (i) network configuration
and structure and aspects of policy
management; (ii) system design and anatysis,
computer
configuration,
software
development; (iii) resource sharing,
distributed data processing, links with
national and international networks; and (iv)
manpower development. The Seminar
recommended the implementation of
Defence science information network
(DESINET).
* Internatiorzal
Conference
011
Bibliographic Databases and Networks,
New Delhi (22-25 Feb 1989). Shri K C Pant.
the then Defence Minister, inaugurated The
Conference in which about 330 delegates
including about 30 foreign experts
participated. Only invited papers from the
Indian and foreign specialists having
expertise
in
planning,
design,
implementation and/or operation of
databases and networks were presented in
four technical sessions, namely, planning
and development of databases. operation of
databases, planning and development of
networks, and operation of networks.
Strengthening of information services;
greater efforts and emphasis on marketing
of information services; development of
information
networks;
continuous
improvements in back-up services, and
efforts to facilitate greater and free flow of
information from the advanced countries
were some of the recommendations of the
Conference.

Technical Advice & Consultancy

DESIDOC
is
used through
consultancy work
other government
departments and other organizations. A
couple of consultanc~projects have been
undertaken by DESIDOC. Many of its staff
members are on the expert committees of

national organizations, such as Bureau of
Indian Standards, Department of Science &
Technology, Department of Riotcchnology,
Department of Scientific & Industrial
~
~ and so
~ on. ~DESIDOC
~ is
represented in most of the information
projects of national level in the country in
an advisory capacity.

'"A library is more important than a university because a library can function without a
university whereas a university cannot do without a library."
-Dr Shankar Dayal Sharma

"We can never be sure that the opinion we are endeavouring to stifle is a false opinion;
and even if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil."
John Stztart Mill

"A little sincerity is a dangerous thing, and a great deal of it is absolutely fatal."
-Oscar WiZde

