DESlDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. t 6, No. 1, January 1996, pp. 3-8

0 1996, DESlDOC

Electronic Publishing
The Unfolding Revolution
Ras Aluri*
Parkway Publishers Inc.,
Boone, North Carolina 28607, USA

ABSTRACT
The author gives an overview of electronic publishing and
enumerates the technological advances that has led to i t s growth. He
discusses the advantages offered by the technology to researchers
and other library users. The disadvantages to the publishers and
libraries/information centres are also discussed and the effect of this
technology on the policies and processes in the library are presented.

1. INTRODUCTION
Electronic publishing i s the
dissemination of information in electronic form
and its distribution to potential users
either on electronic networks such as
Internet and local area networks or in
stand-alone formats such as CD-ROMs
and diskettes. The information so disseminated is intended for the user to read,
print, and download for later use, within
the limits imposed by copyright laws,
including incorporation of selected information into other electronic documents.
Electronic publishing products may
include
text, graphics, audio, video,
numeric and textual databases; reference
sources
such
as directories
and
atlases; and computer programs. The
* Cuest Editor for this special issue. E-mail : aluri @netins.net

products of
electronic publishing are
seen everywhere. These include indexing,
abstracting, and full-text databases; computerised library catalogues (also referred
to as online public access catalogues
or OPACs); national and regional union
catalogues of library collections such as
OCLC (Online Computer Library Center,
Inc.); digital libraries; encyclopaedias,
dictionaries, thesauri, directories, bibliographies, and other reference sources;
refereed
and non-refereed electronic
journals and newsletters; multimedia sites
such as museums; and news sources
which display graphic, audio, video, and
textual information. The vastness and
diversity of these sources is mind-boggling
and we are just witnessing the unfolding
of a major technological
revolution.
Most
such
resources are readily

educational
institutions,
state
and
federal government, and research-supporking foundations, created the information;
publishers
evaluated, published, and
marketed that information; and libraries
acquired, catalogued, stored, preserved,
and heiped in disseminating it.

accessible to users who have access to
Internet.
Electronic publishing is the cutmination
of a number of treads that Rave been
emerging for the last four decades. First
is the rapid development and widespread
use of computer technolog& especially
the advent of microcomputers, and word
processing and typesetting s o f ~ a r ewhich
brought desktop pubiishing to miiliows
of people. The second trend is ihe
growth sf computer newoaks which
resulted in Internet-the global networks
of ne~orks-and opening of internet t s
commercial enterprises and citizens. The
third trend is the merging of computer
and
telecommunications technologies
which, with the help of microcomputers,
telephone Bines, modems, and fiber optic
weworks have converted educational
institutions, businesses, and homes into
information centres and electronic publishing houses. The fourth trend is the
development of information industry that
demonstrated the Beasibiaity and advantages of electronic information for managing Bibrary functions and serving library
users,

Eiectronic publishing i s likely to upset
this neat picture. All the prayers-scholars,
publishers, and libraries-will be affected
by the eSectronic publishing revohtion.
The foilswing are some speculations about
the impact of electronic publishing on
these three players.

2 , RESEARCHERS AND

LlBRARY USERS
The

greatest benefit of electronic
puMisPning i s the richness of information
that is availabie to the end-user. Users
now have access to information that
print technology could not deliver. For
instance, encyclopaedias and dictionaries
can provide audio information which
shows how certain words are pronounced-which is much simpler and
more straightforward to understand than
trying to read and decipher
complex
pronunciation
guides provided
En
dictionaries.
Likewise, iilustrations in
electronic encyclopaedias can, with the
he%p of
animation, demonstrate the
workings of machines, For researchers,
research papers can be accompanied
by the original data that can be
downloaded for further scholarly use.

By the end of 1 9 8 0 ~these
~
trends
converged and the explosive phenomenon of electronic publishing started
taking shape. The dust has not settled
yet but it i s already evident that schslariv
communication, the publishing indbostr~g,
and library and informatiejn centres will
be affected irrevocably,

The traditional print-based publishing
industry, which developed over hundreds
of years, served scholars in furthering
scholarly communication, libraries in preserving
and disseminating scholarly
communication, and
publishers
in
obtaining
reasonable returns on their
investments 111. Scholars, swbsidised by
P

OPMEW

Electronic puhlisking aErows faster
dissemination of information than print
technology because the step of printing
on paper is eliminated altogether. Information may be made accessible o n
-.

D E S i 8 8 6 BuiIe~nof!nf Technoi,1%,16( 1)

Rao Aluri

- Electronic Publishing :The Unfolding Revolution

electronic networks weeks or months
before it can appear in print form.
Electronic publishing gives greater
freedom to researchers to disseminate
their research results without having
to
go through the cumbersome route
of finding a publisher who is willing to
publish their results. In this context,
publishers and scholars are working
with different objectives-publishers need
to make a profit while
scholars
want
expeditious dissemination of their research
findings. Electronic publishing allows those
scholars to by-pass the publisher and
disseminate their scholarship directly to
other scholars and interested lay persons.
One of the arguments advanced by
the print publishers is that they add
value to the scholars' work by peer
reviewing, copy-editing their submissions
and otherwise acting as gatekeepers in
the scholarly
communication process.
This value addition activity, however, is
independent of the medium of publication-that is, the same set of quality
standards, peer review, and intensive
editing
procedures
can
still
be
maintained in electronic publishing.
There are also disadvantages in
electronic publishing from the scholars'
point of view. Much of scholarly publishing is
driven
by
the
"publish
perish"syndrome
in
academic
or
institutions. Scholars are evaluated on
the quality
of
their publications. In
this regard, print publications carry certain
external clues as to the quality-in terms
of their look and feel, design, type of
paper, and so on. In the arena of
electronic publishing, such superficial clues
no longer apply. Such superficial but
important clues have implications for
promotion, tenure, and pay decisions.
Since electronic publishing is so new,
DESlDOC Bulletin of lnf Technol,1996,16(1 )

publishing in this medium does not yet
I--ve the same prestige. Many promotion
and tenure committees may, view electronic publishing as nothing more than
self-publishing. However,
the chances
are that electronic publishing will slowly
gain ascendancy over print publishing in
the near future.

3. PUBLISHERS
Pubiishers embraced electronic publishing technology in recent years because
i t speeds up the publishing process,
makes editorial changes easier to accomplish, and enables the relatively small
publishers to effectively participate in
publishing activities. Electronic publishing
has opened up new markets such as
publication of encyclopaedias in CD-ROM
format, creation
and distribution of
electronic
databases
of indexing and
abstracting
services,
and
electronic
journals. In fact, since most of the
publishers are now requiring their authors
to send in their manuscripts in electronic
format, it is relatively simple to load
them on
computers and make them
available to readers and libraries.
Publishers,
however,
face
serious
dangers from electronic publishing. Many
scholars view publishers as "middle men"
and as "exploiters" of the scholarly
communication process. Scholars, for
instance, earn few royalties from journal
articles and most of the scholarly
communication process is subsidised by
taxpayers. Even though publishers view
themselves as Value adders,"there are
many sceptics. Consequently, there is a
strong tendency towards eliminating this
middle person.
Publishers are driven by profit motive
and therefore, they publish only that
5

Rao Aluri

- Electronic Pub&!

material that i s likely to generate profits.
O n the other hand, the primary motivation
of scholars is the exchange of ideas
with fellow scholars. The motivations of
these two groups thus conflict with each
other.
The print publication process
takes much too long in many cases to
serve the needs of scholars and, therefore,
electronic publishing looks very attractive
to scholars. In any case, we are already
witnessing the impact of electronic
publishing on print publishers-a number
of them are actively expioring internet
publishing; many publishers are making
their reference publications accessible as
electronic products; and the growth of
electronic journals is giving a pause to
journal publishers.

4, LIBRARIES A N D
INFORMATION CENTRES
Libraries and information centres are
the beneficiaries of the electronic publishing revolution. The emphasis i s shifting
to "access" from "ownership", i-e., many
libraries now believe that it is important
to supply scholars and library users what
they need as opposed to having to own
the material that is iikely to be needed
by their users (21. This trend is also
known as "just in Time" service as
opposed to "just in Case" collection.
Likewise, libraries are no longer limited
by the four walls of their buildings.
Resources such as OCLC, regional online
catalogues, and online textual and numeric
databases can be accessed by libraries
irrespective of the physical location of
these resources-that is, such resources
need no longer be located on their
premises or on their campuses. Simpson
calls this phenomenon as "shrinking coren
and "expanding periphery" [3]. The explosive growth of lnternet has already shown

that this dream of "library without wails"
or "virtual library" is within reach.
Electronic publishing resources improved library services to their customers
and made their internal operations more
efficient. For instance, users can now
search vast databases, print results of
their searches, download papers and
information of interest, and further incorporate this electronic information into
their regular day-to-day work.
However, there are disadvantages.
There ir concern about the future of
libraries. If more and more resources are
avai!aule on Internet and in electronic
format and if they can be accessed from
anywhere-e.g., from faculty offices and
students' dormitories-what will become
the role of libraries? The old statement
that "libraries are the hearts of educational
institutions" will no longer hold true if
nobody has to go to the library and if
the libraries are indistinguishable from
computing centres [4]. Another concern
is the threatened historic role of tibraries
in "preserving, organising, and providing
access to the scholarly and cultural
record." Lynch notes that electronic
publishing is leading to centralisation and
monopoly of information which will result
in society's loss of control on the
"integrity of the record" [5]. From a
purely procedural perspective, preserving
and retrospectively accessing electronic
publications will be difficult since the
hardware and software that created that
information are likely to be obsolete
quite quickly and, no one is really sure
of the longevity of the electronic storage
media.
Electronic publishing is forcing libraries
to shift more and more financial resources
from print publications to the acquisition
of electronic resources. Such a financial
DESlDOC Buliefin of inf Techno/.1996,16(1)

Rao Aluri

- Electronic Publishing : The Unfolding Revolution

shift will dramatically affect the publishing
industry and the print publishing industry
may lose its viability-the impact of which
on libraries is not yet clear.
O n another level, libraries' objectives
and internal operations have already been
affected and will be affected further.
Some of the areas that are being affected
include collection development, interlibrary
loan operations, and reference services.
The proliferation of electronic resources
is already blurring the distinction between
local and external collections 161. In the
case of print publications, collection
development librarians worked towards
building local collections so that their
users have ready access to the information
they need. External collections such as
the collections of other libraries could
be accessed but such access was slow
and expensive. In the case of electronic
publishing, the demarcation between the
two types of collections may not either
exist or be relevant to the user. The
user who sits at the computer terminal
and accesses an information resource
does not need to be concerned any
longer about whether that resource is
held by the local library or by some
other outside entity. In this situation, the
role of collection development needs to
be rethought.
Likewise, the role of interlibrary loan
operations may also change in a
substantial manner 171. If libraries load
full-text journals on computer networks
and make them available to regional or
member libraries, users no longer have
to go through interlibrary loan operations
to get copies of the articles they need.
Such a scenario, however, is beneficial
for both the libraries and users. Libraries
can improve access to their materials
while, at the same time, keeping the
DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol,1996,16(1 )

'

costs down by eliminating a layer of
personnel and services. Users also benefit
because access to the materials they
need may improve while achiev~ng a
faster turn-around time.
The role of reference librarian i s also
changing dramatically. Reference librarians
are now able to serve their patrons
better by accessing and showing their
users how to access a wide diversity
of electronic information sources. They
however, face the problem of technostress in that they are expected to learn
about a large number of electronic
resources with their differing protocols,
user interfaces, and retrieval capabilities.
In addition, many users now have the
luxury of by-passing reference librarians
altogether and still be able to access
the
information
they
need
quite
successfully. At this stage, however,
accessing and using electronic resources,
including those on Internet, IS ditticult
and confusing. Although vast resources
are available on Internet, navigating and
retrieving information on Internet, even
with the help of tools such as Netscape
and Web Crawler, is still perplexing and
time consuming for novice users. This
will give an opportunity to reference
librarians to redesign their responsibilities
more and more towards instruction In
the use of electronic resources.

5. REFERENCES
1. Harnad, S. PostGutenberg galaxy wars.
Times Higher Ed. Suppl., May 1 2, I 995,
No. 1 175, vi. Also available on Internet:
http://cogsci.ecs.soton.ac.u ki-harnad/
THES/thes.html
2. Lee, S.H. (Ed.). Access, ownershrp and
resource sharing. Haworth Press, New
York, 1994. (Also issued as: journal o i
Library Administration, 1994, 20(1)).
7

Rao Aluri - Electronic Publishing : The Unfolding Kevolurion

3. Simpson, D.B. Resource sharing=access
t ownership: Bafancing the equation in
an unbalanced world. Iournal of Library
Administration, 1994, 20(%
1, 95-107.
4. Cross, R.A. and Borgrnan, C.L. The
incredible vanishing library. Am Lib.,
1995, 26(9), 900-04.

5. Lynch, C.A. Rethinking the integrity of
the scholarly record in the n e ~ o r k e d

information age. Educom Rev., 1934,

29(1),38-40.
6. Buckland, M. What will collection
developers do? Info. Tech. & Libr., 1995,
14(3), 155-59.
7.

Nye, j.B. A new vision for resource
sharing: TRLN document
delivery
project. North Carolina Libr., 1995,
53(3), 4 00-04.

---

DESiDOC Bullstin of Inf Technoi,1996,t 6( 1 )
