DESIDOC Bulletin of Information Technology, Vol. 20, Nos. 1&2, January & March 2000, pp. 7-12
O 2000, DESIDOC

IT Strategy in Defence Environment*
Dr APJ Abdul Kalam

ABSTRACT
The growth of information technology (IT) has influenced the national
economy, security, health and education, tremendously. The author highlights the
impact of IT on defence research and development activities as well as his concern
in using commercially available operating systems for accessing information as there
exists a possibility of international bugs which will be detrimental to the national
security. The author emphasises that appropriate ways and means are to be evolved
to take care of this aspect, particularly in the Air Force environment where
cryptography with its two components-encryption and decryption will have the
dominance.

1. ONSET OF IT REVOLUTION

2. PROGRESS & THE CONCERN

The dimensions of warfare has changed the
world in the last five decades, particularly in the
environment of new technology of aerospace
vehicle,
communication
and
computers.
lnformation Technology (IT) is all pervasive.
Today, its growth has a tremendous influence
on the national economy, war theatre, health
sector and education. IT area, even though in
the initial phase, had full support and thrust
from defence establishments. In the last one
decade, IT has revolutionised o n its own, driven
primarily by commercial push.

The high performance computers and
microprocessors have become one of the most
important modules in revolutionising IT. This
can be seen that the PCs took about 16 years
to reach 50 million people, whereas
connectivity i.e., Internet alone has reached the
same number of people in just four years.
Likewise, the processor speed in terms of MIPS
is doubling every two years.

The Technology Information, Forecasting
and Assessment Council (TIFAC) has generated
the Technology Vision 2020 document with the
help of 500 experts in multiple fields for
transformation of developing India into a
developed lndia in two decades. One of the
five major areas identified by Technology
VISION 2020 is IT. Fortunately in India, IT has
been recognised as a mission area and given
national focus by many governmental actions.
-

.

-

* Extract of Keynote Address at the IAF-CII Semmar on
"Informatron Technology Challenges of the New Mrllennium
for the lndran Arr Force" on 6 May 1999 ~n New Delhr.
DESlDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1 & 2 )

Computers performance has now been
established. One can obtain all published
human knowledge available today in our midst
anytime.
However,
technology
denial
unfortunately has constrained this great trend of
the spread of human knowledge. Technology
denials of the developed world creates a hurdle
in the progress of the developing countries in
this field.

-

Today, virtual library exists and is accessible
through Internet. The operating system available
commercially may have intentional bugs which
will be detrimental to the national security. In
view of this, there is a necessity for developing
one's own operating system. Similarly, it has
been reported by many countries that every
user of Windows NT will be identified by the
7

supplier of this system. This vulnerability is more
predominant when one goes in the network
conditions. Similarly, many of the chips come
with embedded software. This embedded
software could be carrying invisible 'information
soldiers'. The same problem exists when one
buys a modem and encryption algorithms.
Hence, on selective basis, the Armed Forces,
R&D Estts and industries should take up the
challenges of making their own operating
systems, own microprocessors and own
encryption/decryption technology.
It is essential for security reasons, especially
for military system, to have a clean silicon chip
with indigenous embedded software. The
strength of Information technology in a country
is directly proportional to the strength of the
indigenous capability, particularly in the
computer
software
and
microprocessor
industry.

3. TECHNOLOGY MODULES O F IT
A very important design tool, Virtual Reality
(VR) Laboratory, has
been specifically
established for the development of Light
Combat Aircraft by Defence Research &
Development Organisation. This Laboratory is
the culmination of multiple technologies of
CAD,
graphics and
high
performance
computers with powerful software. The VR
capability has enabled virtual wind tunnel
(Fig. 1) and also virtual prototyping.

IT level is calibrated through two major
technological bench- marks: (i) India's
supercomputer status, and (ii) development of
India's own microprocessor (Fig. 2).
With the networking of multiple sensors and
communication network (Fig. 3) in supercomputer
environment
together
with
indigenous microprocessor, a tremendous effort
is possible to realise a dominant battlefield
knowledge (DBK). The DBK needed can be
developed through our core competence to
meet unified battlefield strategy (Fig. 4).

4. IT ENHANCES WEAPON
CAPABILITIES
Effectiveness of weapons in IT environment
is vital, particularly in respect of military
dominance, range, lethality and speed. It is the
networked environment which gives the
advantage of having both range as well as
speed. Organisation evolution, IT evolution and
access control evolution are the prime factors
for graduation of IT reaching anyone, anywhere
and anytime. What can be the defence strategy
in such environment? Surely, the open
algorithm has to gradually graduate to its own
algorithm, own software with encrypted system
(Fig. 5).
The role of Industry for partnership with
Defence sector in the areas of IT is of utmost
importance (Fig 6). Cryptography with its two
components, encryption and decryption, will
have the dominance, particularly in the Air
Force environment. In this regard, it is essential
that
(a) The government must encourage research in
cryptography and generate trust in private
companies and individuals that their
information is indeed secure.
(b) A good research base is available for this.
(c) A national debate be initiated for a secure
information interchange policy for India.
(d) An inter-country debate be initiated for crossborder communication and cryptographic
standards.
(e) A national security policy and a global
security IT policy need should be generated.
In this direction, five task teams have been
formed in the Ministry of Defence for
industries, defence production and DRDO to
work together in multiple areas including
communication and IT. This partnership will
draw upon design strength in DRDO labs/estts
to enrich industries to deliver products on
demand. So, it is necessary that industries have
partnership with the Ministry of Defence,
particularly to meet the challenges in the IT
sector.

DESIDOC Bulletin of Inf Technol, 2000,20(1&2)

Figuml. Virtual wind tunnel

I

TEEHMOLOGYBREAKTHROUGH
JCEQ COM?

NG SYSTEMS

1

RELIANCE IN THE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF SUPER
COMPUTER UPTO 100 GFLOP, UPGRADABLE TO TERAFLOPS

INDIA'S OWN MICROPROCESSOR FOR STRATEGIC APPLICATIONS
U ENABLING OF ACCELERATED GROWTH IN COMPUTATIONAL.LY
INTENSIVE TECHNOLOGIES (CFD. SIMULATION)

Figure 2. Technology breakthrough: advanced computmg systems
KX)CBulletinollnf Technol, ZW0,20(1&2)

C

9

COMMUNICATION NETWORK

Figure 3. Communication network

-

-

UNtFlED BATTLEFIELD

Figure 4. Unified battlefield strategy
10

DESIDOC Bulletin oflnf Technol, 20W,20(1&2)

Figure 5. IT applications

COMPI:TFiG

sysrrxs

PROCESSORS

ABSORfTION AND
PRODUCI'ION
PRODUCT SUPPORT
AND UPGRADATION

DEVICES

Figure 6. DRDO-CII partnership

WC Bulleun oflnf Technol,2000,20(1&2)

11

Dr APJ Abdul Kalam is the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Govt. of
India. He is also the Chairman of Technology Information Forecasting and
Assessment Council (TIFAC), which generated the 'Technology Vision 2020'
documents. Born in 1931 at Rameswaram, 'Dr Kalam specialised in Aero
Engineering from Madras Institute of Technology, Chennai. He initially joined
Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO) in 1958 and then
joined Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) in 1963. He made
contributions for SLV-3 to inject Rohini satellite. He rejoined DRDO in 1982
and conceived the integrated guided missile development programme
(IGMDP) for indigenous missiles. Dr Kalam has also made significant
contribution to lndian satellite and launch vehicles programme. He is called
the father of missile development programme of India. He is the recipient of
several awards including National Design Award; D r Biren Roy Space Award;
O m Prakash Bhasin Award; National Nehru Award, Prof Y Nayudamma
Memorial Cold Medal (1996); C M M o d i Award for Science (1 996); HK Firodia
Award for Excellence in S&T (1 996); Veer Savarkar Award (1998) and lndira
Candhi Award for National Integration (1997). He has been awarded Padma
Bhushan in 1981, Padma Vibhushan in 1990 and Bharat Ratna, the highest{
civilian award of India, in 1997. Recently, the Visva Bharati conferred its:
highest award Deshikottam o n him.
